Hori Ram finished feeding his two bullocks and then turned to his wife Dhaniya.
Send Gobar to hoe the sugar cane.
I don't know when I'll be back.
Just get me my stick.
Dhaniya had been making fuel-cakes, so her hands were covered with dung.
‘First eat something before you leave,’ she said.
“What's the big hurry?’.
A frown deepened the wrinkles on Hori's forehead, ‘All you think about is food, But T have to worry that I may not even get to see the master if I reach there late.
Once he starts his bathing and prayers I'll have to wait around for hours.
“That's exactly why I'm suggesting you first have something to eat.
And what harm would be done by not going at all today?. You were there just two days ago.’ “Why do you go poking your nose into things you don’t understand? Just hand me my stick and get on with your own work.
It's thanks to all these visits of mine that we're still alive.
God knows what would have become of us otherwise.
You know how many people here in the village have been thrown off their land or had their property taken away.
When someone’s heel is on your neck, it's best to keeplicking his feet.' Dhaniya was less sophisticated in these matters.
They ploughed the land of the zamindar,! so all he should care about was the rent.But why should they have to flatter the landlord or lick his feet?.
True, these twenty years of married life had taught her that however much she cut corners, skimped on food and clothes, and clung to every cowrie, it was still hard to pay the rent.
 She argued the questiondaily with her husband, refusing to admit defeat.
Only three of their six children were still alive—Gobar, a boy of about sixteen, and two girls—Sona, twelve, and Rupa, eight.
Three sons had died in infancy.
Dhaniya still believed that medicines would 1Hindi terms are only given in italics the first time they occur and are all explained in the Glossary at the end of this book
15 have saved them, but she'd been unable to afford even a pice worth.
She was not very old herself—just thirty-six—but her hair was completely grey and her face wrinkled.
Her body had grown weak, the wheat complexion of her youth had turned dark brown, and her eyes had become dim—all because of the struggle for survival.
Life had brought no joy—only a constant weariness which had worn away all concern for self-respect.
Why bother with all this flattery for land that couldn’t even provide food for their stomachs?.
 Rebellion kept welling up in her heart—but then 2 few harsh words from her husband would jolt her back to reality.
Defeated again, she brought Hori's stick, jacket, turban, shocs and tobacco pouch and flung them down in front of him.
Hori glared at her-
“What's this outfit for? You think I'm going to your father's house?. And even if I were, it's not as though you have some young sisters there that I should dress up for." A trace of a smile softened his dark sunken features.
‘I suppose you think that if some gorgeous young thing were there, she'd get a big thrill out of looking at you?.’ Hori folded his tattered jacket carefully and placed it on the cot and said-
‘So you consider me an old man, do you? I'm not even forty yet.
And men are still lusty as bulls at sixty.’ ‘Not ones like you,
Go look at your face in the mirror.
Just how are you going to be lusty when you can’t even get enough milk and butter to make a few drops of cintment for your eyes? It scares me to see the condition you're in—makes me wonder how we'll manage in our old age,
Whose door will we beg at?.’ Hori’s momentary mellowness vanished as though consumed in the flames of reality.
‘I'll never reach sixty, Dhaniya,’ he said, picking up his stick,
‘T'll be gone long before that.’ *All right now, that’s enough !” Dhaniya snapped,
‘Don’t say such evil-omened things.
Even when someone speaks nicely to you, you can't give a civil answer.' Hori shouldered his stick and left the house, Dhaniya, standing in the doorway, watched him for a long time.
His despairing words had shaken her already batterced heart.
Blessings for Hori welled up within her, inspired by all the devotion and self-sacrifice her womanhood could command.
Her marriage was the one straw to which she clung in crossing the bottomless ocean of poverty.
Hori's thoughtless remark, though close to the truth, had shaken her, threatening to tear even that one feeble straw from her grasp,
In fact it was the very truthful- 16 ness of the statement that made it so disturbing.
The taunt ‘Hey One-eye |" hurts a one-eyed man more than it does a two-eyed one.
Hori hurried along.
Looking over the green expanse of young sugar cane plants rippling on both sides of the footpath, he told him- self that if God would just send enough rain for the crops to come up well, he'd certainly buy a cow...and not just one of those local ones, which give no milk and whose calves are no good except perhaps to turn the oilman’s press.
No, he would have 2 western cow, a Punjabi cow; and he'd take such good care of her that she'd give at least four or five quarts of milk.
Gobar longed for milk.
And if he couldn’t be properly nourished now, when would he be? If Gobar could just get milk for a year, he'd be a boy worth looking at.
Besides, the calves would become good bullocks, and a pair would bring a good two hundred rupees.
What's more, it would be an excellent omen to have a cow tied by the front door where they could see it the first thing each morning.
But there was no telling when this dream would be fuifilled, when that auspicious day would arrive.
Like all householders, Hori had for years nursed this longing for a caw.
It was his life’s ambition, his greatest dream, since any ideas of living off bank interest, of buying land or of building a mansion were too grandiose for his cramped mind to comprehend.
The June sun was rising over the mango grove, turning the red of dawn to brilliant silver, and the air was beginning to warm up.
Farmers working in the fields beside the path greeted him respectfully and invited him to share a smoke with them.
Hori had no time for such pleasantries, but they brought a glow of pride to his wrinkled face.
It was only because he associated with the landlords that every- one showed him such respect.
Otherwise who would pay any atten- tion to a farmer with just three acres of land? As it was, though, even three and four-plough farmers greeted him—no small henour.
Leaving the path through the fields, he came to a hollow where so much rainwater collected during the monsoon that a little grass remained even in the height of summer.
Cattle from the nearby villages came here to graze, and there was still a cool freshness in the air.
Hori took several deep breaths and thought of sitting down for awhile, since he'd be dying of heat in the scorching loo wind the rest of the day.
A number of farmers were eager to lease this bit of land and had offered a good price, but the Rai Sahib—God bless him— had plainly told them it was reserved for grazing and would not be relinquished at any price.
If he'd been one of those selfish zamindars, 17 he'd have said the cattle could go to hell, that there was no reason for him to miss the chance to make a little money.
But the Rai Szhib still held to the old values, feeling that any landlerd whe didn’t look after his tenants was less than human.
Suddenly Hori saw Bhola, the milkman from the adjoining village, approaching with some cows.
Bhola sold milk and butter, and some- times, when he could get a good price, he would also sell cows to the villagers.
Hori eyed the cows longingly.
If only Bhola would let him have that first one | He'd pay for it in instalments.
Hori knew that there was no money at home, that the [and rent was still unpaid and that the loan from Bisesar Shah was still outstanding, with one anna to the rupee interest mounting on it monthly.
But he was driven on by a boldness learned in poverty, a shamelessness that ignores demands, curses and even blows.
Shaken by the yearning that had been disturbing his heart for years, he greeted the approaching milk- man and said, ‘How are things with you, brother Bhola? I hear you bought two new cows at the fair.
“Yes, two cows and twao calves,” Bhola answered casually, guessing Hori’s intentions ‘My old ones had all gone dry, and you can’t make a living if there’s no milk for the customers.’ Hori stroked the flank of the Jead cow.
‘Obviously a good milker.
How much was she?’ Bhola began to show off.
‘Prices are high these days.
Eighty rupees I had to pay—and thirty for each calf as well.
And yet my customers still demand four quarts to the rupee.’ “You people are really lion-hearted, brother.
But then again, there’s nothing like what you've got here in any of the villages around.’Bhola swelled with pride.
‘The Rai Sahib offered me a hundred for her—and fifty cach for the calves.
But T wouldn’t sell.
God willing, T should make a hundred rupees an her first calves.’ ‘No doubt about that.
And how could the master afford them any- way? He'd probably take them as a gift of course.
But only you people have the guts to trust to luck and risk handfuls of money that way., Ah to have the blessing of looking at this cow forever ! How lucky you are, being able to spend your time serving cows.
I can’t even get their dung.
It’s shameful for a family man not to have even one cow.
Year after year goes by without the sight of milk.
My wife keeps pestering me to speak to you, and I tell her I will when we happen to run into each other.
She thinks very highly of you—keeps saying she's never 18 seen such 2 man before, one who always keeps his eyes duwn when speaking to a woman.' Bhola's pride swelled even more with this brimming cup of praise.
‘A good man always treats others’ daughters and daughters-in-law as though they were his own, Any villain who would stare at 2 woman deserves to be shot,’ “You're a hundred per cent right, brother.
A gentleman is one who respects another man’s honour as though it were his own.’ ‘When a man’s wife dies, he’s just as crippled as 2 woman when her husband dies.
My home’s a desert now, with no one to offcr me even a cup of water.’ Bhola’s wife had died of heatstroke the year before, Hori knew this, but he had not realized the passion that still coursed through Bola's decrepit, fifty-five-year-old frame.
Now Bhola’s eyes were glistening with longing for a wife, and Hori, his practical peasant shrewdness alerted, spotted his chance.
‘There’s truth in the old saying that a house without a woman is haunted by ghosts.
Why don’t you marry again?’ ‘I'm looking around, but no one’s about to get trapped easily, even though I'm ready to shell out a hundred rupees or more.
Well, it’s in God's hands....
T'll keep an eye out too.
God willing, you'll soon have a home set up again.’ ‘Believe me, brother, that would be a big relief.
By the grace of God there’s plenty to eat in my house, and twenty quarts of milk a day.
But what good does it do?” ‘Well, there’s a girl at my inaws’ place whose hushand left her some three or four years ago and went off to Calcutta.
Poor thing squeezes out a living grinding flour.
No children...
good-looking...
talks nicely...
a real goddess |’ The wrinkles vanished from Bhola’s face.
Wonderful the rejuvenat- ing power of hope! ‘I'll count on you then.
When you're free some time, let’s go take a look at her.’ ‘I'll let you know when it’s all settled.
Rushing things is likely to spoil them.
‘Whenever you think best.
There's no point in hurrying.
And if you like that black and white cow, then take her.’ ‘I'm not worthy of such a cow, brother.
And I don’t want to put you to such a loss.
It wouldn't be right for me to get a strangle-hold on a friend.
I'll manage 2s I have in the past.' 19 “You taik as though we were strangers, Hori.
Go ahead and take the cow, for whatever price you wish.
Having her at your house will be no different than at mine.
T paid eighty rupees.
You can give me the same.
Now go ahead.’ ‘But remember, brother, I don't have the cash’ ‘So who's asking for cash?’ Hori's chest was bursting.
Eighty rupees was not at all high for this cow—sturdy, able to give six or seven quarts of milk twice a day, so gentle that even a child could milk her.
Each of her calves would be worth a hundred rupees.
And how handsome his door would be with her tied there.
He was already four hundred rupees in debt, but he looked on these loans as a kind of gift.
Then too, if he could arrange another marriage for Bhola, that would keep him quiet for at least a year or two.
And if no marriage worked out, it would still be no loss to Hori.
At worst Bhola would come demanding the money, trying to start trouble and shouting curses.
But it took more than that to shame Hori by this time.
He'd become used to such things, thanks to his life as a peasant.
Granted he was tricking Bhola, but that was only to be expected in his position, and he would have treated a written contract in the same way.
Hori was a God-fearing man, as far as that goes, constantly aware of the destructive side of God's nature, cowed by anxiety over the threat of drought or flood.
He didn’t consider this kind of deceit as deceit, however.
It was just a matter of self-interest, and there was nothing wrong with (hat.
He did it all the time.
Though he had several rupees at home, he'd swear to the moneylender that he hadn't a pice.
And it scemed only right to increase the weight of jute by soaking it, or of cotton by leaving seeds in it.
Besides, this present situation in- volved more than profit—it was also good sport.
An old man’s Just is always amusing, and to make it pay something would surely be no crime.
Bhola handed the cow's halter to Hori, ‘Take her.
She'll remindyou of me.
As soon as she calves you'll start getting six quarts of milk.
Come on—T'll lead her to your house.
Otherwise, not knowing you,she might give some trouble on the way.
And now I'll tell you the truth—the master was actually offering ninety for her.
But whatappreciation do those people have for caws? He'd have passed her on to some official, and what do they care about serving cows? All they know is how to suck blood.
They’d keep her as long as she gave milk and then sell her to someone else.
Who knows where she’d end up? 20 Money's not everything, brother.
A man's sacred duty counts for something too.
She'll do well at your place.
You're not likely to eat and then go off to sleep leaving her hungry.
You'll look after her and fuss over her.
The cow will bring us blessings.
And anyway, though I hate to admit it, there’s not even a handful of straw in my house.
The bazaar took all my money.
I thought of borrewing a little from the moneylender for some straw, but I haven't yet paid back the last loan, so he refused.
Trying to feed so many animals worries me to death.
Even a handful each would add up to over a bushel a day.
Only God can see me through....’ Hori sighed sympathetically.
‘Why didn’t you let me know earlier? T've just sold off a cartload of straw.’ Bhola beat his forehead and said, “The reason I didn’t tell you, brother, is that a man can't go around crying about his troubles to everyone.
People aren’t going to share them—they just make fun.
I'm not worried about the cows that have gone dry—they can be kept alive on leaves and things.
But this one can’t go without proper fodder.
What you might do is let me have ten or twenty rupees for some straw.’ Now it's true that a peasant is mercenary.
It's hard to squeeze a bribe out of his putse.
A shrewd bargainer, he'll haggle for hours with the moneylender to get the interest reduced one pice.
And as long as he has a single doubt, he can’t be inveigled into anything.
But he also spends his whole life co-operating with nature.
Trees pro- duce fruit for men to eat.
Fields produce grain which feeds the world.
Cows produce milk—not for themselves, but for others to drink.
Clouds produce rain which quenches the earth.
In such 2 system there's no room for petty selfishness.
As a farmer, Hori had been taught that one doesn’t warm his hands on the flames of another man’s burning house.
So, hearing Bhola's tale of woe, Hori's attitude changed.
Handing back the halter, he said, “I don’t have anty money, brother, but there's a little straw left which you can have.
Come and take it, If T were to accept 4 cow that you're selling just because you're out of fodder, I'd be inviting the punishment of God.’ ‘But won’t your own bullocks starve?’ Bhola asked, ‘Surely youdon’t have that much straw to spare.’ ‘Not at all, brother.
The crop was good this year.
‘It was wrong of me even to mention it to you.’ ‘If you'd said nothing and I found all this out later, I'd have been 21 very hurt that you treated me like an outsider.
How could we get along if men didn’t help their brothers in times of need?’ ‘Anyway, go ahead and take this cow.’ Not now, brother.
Some other time.” “Then let me give you some milk to pay for the straw.’ “Why all this talk about payment?’ Hori reproached him.
‘T T ate ameal or two at your house, would you insist on my paying for it?’ “Your bullocks won’t starve then?’‘God will open up a way.
The rains are almost here—T1'll grow an- other crop of something.' ‘In any case, the cow is yours.
Come get her whenever you want.” ‘Taking the cow now would be as bad as buying my brother’s bullocks at an auction.’ If Hori had been smart enough to realize the implications of this discussion, he'd have taken the cow home with no misgivings.
Since Bhola had not demanded cash, he was obviously not selling her to buy fodder.
But Hori was like a horse which hears a rustling in the leaves, stops abruptly, and, though whipped, refuses to take another step.
Ingrained in him was the idea that taking anything from a per- son in trouble is a sin.
Bhola could hardly contain himself.
“Then should I send someone for the straw?’ T'm on my way to the Rai Sahib's house right now,’ Hori replied, “but T should be back shortly.
Send someone in a little while.' Bhola's eye's filled with tears.
Hori, brother, you've been my salvation.
T now know that I'm not alone in the world, that even [ have a friend.” He hesitated a moment and then added, ‘Now don’t forget that other matier Hori set off in high spirits, his heart swelling with satisfaction.
What if eight or ten bushels of straw have been lost, he thought.
I've saved the poor fellow from having to sell his cow in a time of trouble.
And as soon as 1 get some more fodder, T'll go collect the cow.
God help me now to find 2 woman for him.
Then there'll be no problem.
He turned and looked back.
There was the spotted cow, tossing her head, flicking away flies with her tail, and sauntering along with {he careless dignity of a queen in the midst of her slave-girls.
What an auspicious day it would be when that giver of all blessings was tied up at his own door !